What happens when you initialize a repository? Why do you need to do it?

An empty git repository is created. Files are not automatically added because
I may not want everything in the folder to be committed. It is important to do
initialization as how else will git know what to put in repo.

How is the staging area different from the working directory and the repository?
What value do you think it offers?

Staging area is somewhere in the middle between working directory and repository.
It's important because you can add files to the staging area before making the
actual commit, may be you are done working on one file but not ready to commit
yet until another file is ready, you can add the first file in staging area and
continue working on the second file.

How can you use the staging area to make sure you have one commit per logical
change?

I can add files to staging area, take diff with last commit or working directory
and if I find some odd change I can call git reset [filename] to unstage the file

What are some situations when branches would be helpful in keeping your history
organized? How would branches help?

If I want to try an experimental feature or try some change which may break the
system, I can create a branch for it and make changes to it. So my master branch,
which I know works perfectly, is unchanged while I am working on a separate copy.

How do the diagrams help you visualize the branch structure?

Every commit remembers it's immediate parent. So if I want to work on an experimental
feature on a particular commit then we can create a branch on that commit to so that
it is not lost somewhere. This is very hard to understand without diagrams.

What is the result of merging two branches together? Why do we represent it in
the diagram the way we do?

When we are done working on an experimental change and we are sure that it is
working, we would naturally want to add it into the production environment.
This can be done using the merge feature. Merging branches combines commits
from both branches.

What are the pros and cons of Git’s automatic merging vs. always doing merges
manually?

Pros:
 Automatic merging makes my life simpler
 Manual merging gives me more control over conflicts
Cons:
 Automatic merging cannot resolve conflicts
 Manual merging is time consuming and error prone